where are you is it my studio I've not
blown this up in my bedroom because I
like looking at great screen
no in zoom you can add things in the in
the background now that is hilarious I'm
so bored at the moment hello health and
fitness lovers of the world welcome back
to face we are so excited to be bringing
you another great mind today we have a
very special guest here the scientist he
has a PhD in clinical neuroscience he is
a senior university lecturer for anatomy
and physiology with a passion for
educating people on the functioning of
the human body dr. Mike Todorovic is our
go-to scientists welcome to the show doc
hey team thanks for having me we're so
excited to have you on here Mike can you
tell to be here tell us a little bit
about yourself
so basically like Felicia said I have a
PhD in clinical neuroscience I did my
undergraduate degree in biomolecular
science which doesn't really exist
anymore it's just the science degree
basically and got first-class honours
for that and then moved on to the PhD
where I focused on the genetics of
Parkinson's disease that's what my PhD
was on and currently I'm a senior
lecturer of anatomy and physiology
Griffith University and I have PhD
students doing research on spinal cord
injury and also looking at pain in
dementia so I'm basically a human body
generalist amazing Wow and you're a
podcaster too and we love your podcast
you simplify everything you make
everything sounds so easy about the
human body when it's just so complex but
not the way you explain love education
love education
trying to supervise simplify complex
topics I basically I've got a podcast
with a colleague of mine dr. Matt and so
the podcast is dr. Matt dr. Mike's
medical podcast I have to plug it I'm
sorry I got a YouTube channel as well
where I talk about the human body yeah
60,000 subscribers that teach is quite
good and run ABC radio every week
talking about the human body yeah we we
do a lot of reach out reach basically of
Education
my thing is Instagram and I come to you
everyday and I obviously check your
stuff every day and you've got a little
anatomy lesson and it's a nice little
top it's just a great all-around guy and
a great all-round guide to be following
especially if you're in the fitness and
wellness industry yeah as fletcher so it
keeps everything simple but it's very
technical at the same time but today
actually the main reason why we want to
chat to you I'm listening to you tell us
what your PhD was on it's a little bit
different for the topic that we want to
we're gonna discuss many topics over the
coming months though with you my
absolutely I think we'd love to have you
like I am glad that we have connected
you know a months ago you came to my gym
many months ago and I'm so happy that
we've connected with you because we'd
love for you to be our go-to kind of
science guy we love to debunk stuff from
time to time we actually forgot to
mention that you have an interest in
training I guess that's why you started
kind of touching base with Sebastian
yeah tell us a little bit about that
absolutely like training for yourself
what's the interest there yeah yeah just
try both my wife and I we love fitness
love training I basically came across
basses page on Instagram saw what he
does and saw that it was no [__]
which you don't get when you've got
coaches fitness trainers PT's there's
always some little angle that they're
taking some way of selling a particular
product which sort of just tweaks the
truth a little bit or is just downright
not correct but I like basses basic
approach which is actually it's not a
basic approaches a complex approach but
it works on the basic principles which
are
true and so I basically reached out to
Bass wanted to see if we could do
something together was bass and Andrew
was kind enough to let me come down to
one of your sessions down in Sydney with
my colleague dr. Matt who we do the
podcast with and I am constantly
learning everyday from what you're doing
so I mean I love the fact that on
Instagram now you can be an educator and
you can learn at the same time I'm
learning stuff every day from what I'm
seeing and where you're putting out
which is just awesome it's crazy that's
the biggest compliment man like this is
a guy here with the PhD kind of saying
that he's learning off me and that's how
I felt when I had you guys in our
seminars and I remember just going the
biggest brains in the room and I
remember I remember looking over to you
guys for approval when we're going
through the functional anatomy of all
the movements going how am I going guys
and I had the nod of approval from you
guys so it's like your knowledge of
anatomy is actually really good it's a
few levels below these guys but it's
definitely good enough to be able to
teach the level that I'm teaching at for
sure but anyway that was a huge
compliment thank you very much for that
what we do I'm sure that you understand
what we do but we train all sorts of
people my audience is very different to
the base body babes audience I train all
sorts of people usually athletic
population and the girls train women
only so they discriminate and they won't
they won't touch you if you're a dude
sorry to say you know we're always
comparing methods with each other and
also comparing feedback from our
audiences like for example I get girls
that come to me that have goals of
competing in powerlifting competitions
and strongwoman competitions girls that
don't really their main priorities
performance over appearance and they've
definitely got different goals to the
girls that come to the base body babes
for their own training and I'd say that
that the main audience that the base
body buds have more general population
what do you say the main goal is not
performance no it's well Morris
aesthetic aesthetic and general wellness
yeah general health and there's a lot of
things
that we talked about they're very proper
with the way that they deliver their
information for example something that
I'd go by with the aesthetic goals of a
lot of the women that come to me is most
women have a goal to be lower body
dominant a lot of the girls that I train
when they get to a certain point with
their benchpress like I've got girls
that are approaching 100 kilo bench
presses which is for a female it's it's
really heavy right I'm sure everyone can
agree but then they get to a point where
they come to me and they say I've had it
a number of times
hey hey bass do you think that my pecs
are gonna stop growing if I continue to
get stronger and the answer is well no
that's like the muscle growth is an
adaptation for your goals your goal is
to lift the heavy weight and you've got
to build those muscles to support your
goals so what is your new goal and it's
like well I get to a point where they
don't want to be benching anymore and I
say this to my girls when I start
announcing out on social media saying
women are lower body dominant men are
more upper body dominant and Felicia and
Dini they say to me you can't be like
that because there are girls that are
more upper-body dominant and you're
gonna offend people and I say well it's
not a matter of being offensive it's a
matter of the feedback that I'm getting
from my audience if the girl comes to
you it is more upper body dominant do
you train her to be even more upper-body
dominate and the answer is no usually
they have the goal of being more lower
body dominant anyway I would have to say
that the basis of our training isn't so
much on science and physiology but it's
more goal orientated so if a girl comes
to me and says to me I want to be jacked
I'm gonna help her get jacked if a girl
comes to me and says I want to be petite
and feminine I'm gonna say you know what
why don't you go try baby baby but what
we would love to do although I said
we're not really like we're kind of
guided by science but not led by it if
that makes sense but we would love to
hear your take on the differences the
physiological differences between males
and women and how we can use that and
not just us our audience would love to
hear the differences so that we can
apply it to our training and is if there
is any different but goals aside if
there is any differences with the ways
that we should train women to men and
and why what is your take on the
anatomical and physiological difference
between men and women and how it would
relate to the differences that we should
be training men and women I'd say it's a
good question and it's a big question
and I think the point that you're made
to begin with is a really important
point because I can start talking about
stats I can talk about the data that's
been published within the literature but
that's an amalgamation of averages and
what coaches do and pts do is they don't
train the average population they train
very specific people and so very
specific people have very specific needs
a lot of the time and one person
compared to another person can be vastly
different however when you take a whole
population and you average it out these
variances start to diminish so I can
easily talk to you today about the
population differences and I think this
information is really important for
coaches or pts to have in their tool
belt but it should just be a guide and I
think the most important thing is to
listen to your client because your
clients going to have very specific
goals and like you stated the goal of
aesthetics or the goal of being the
strongest or the goal of whatever it may
be it may work hand in hand with health
or it may not go hand in hand
with health so the best thing in regards
to the goal may not be the best thing in
regards to health and I'm sure we can
all probably agree that certain types of
sports or even certain types of physique
training especially to the extreme
physique training for extreme athletes
and yeah for the stage when you're on
the stage you're not in a healthy way so
you're not training for health in that
point but that could still be your goal
so there's a lot of important points I
think to take into consideration when we
look at men and women and their
particular needs and differences there
are obvious differences but I think
there's probably more similarities than
differences so if we were to you know
write up males write up three males draw
a circle around them and then see how
much those two circles overlap you'd
find that probably more of those two
circles overlap then don't overlap
those differences are important but so
are the similarities and so some
obviously similarities and the fact that
both male men and women can put on
muscle size both can hypertrophy which
is just growth in the size of the
skeletal muscle and both respond to
resistance training and hypertrophy and
response to resistance training even the
same type of resistance training
obviously men have a greater absolute
strength and a greater absolute muscle
bulk but it doesn't mean women can't
have this if they don't train so other
things that come into consideration are
obviously things like the menstrual
cycle metabolic needs demands if a woman
gets pregnant for example this can
change things so there's a whole bunch
of different factors that can come into
play it's an interesting thing that you
say you know men and women can both
hypertrophy they both have the potential
for muscle growth and it's a message
that when we started off in the fitness
industry that it was kind of like the
thing to do was to spread the word that
women can't build muscles so you
shouldn't fear coming into the gym and
training and I came in and I've you know
I've been working with obviously I've
been training with these girls for
probably about 20 years and and I know
for a fact that women can build muscle
and and these girls are petite but I've
definitely worked with women that step
up on stage to do bodybuilding women
that power lift and women that just have
a goal of building muscle and I know
that as I said my the main audience that
I have is performance-based and when
someone comes to me and they go you know
I can bench 50 kilograms for example and
and I turn them into a hundred kilogram
bench press up something there's an
adaptation that occurs and that is his
muscle growth their body has to adapt in
a way that's going to be able to handle
the demands of their weight training and
muscles grow and you know we go and
spread the message actually women can
build muscle but it's not such a bad
thing
because you know we can help you with
where exactly where you want to build
that muscle like we you know we've got a
good understanding of movement and all
of the exercises this is what our
expertise is and we've had times where
women come on and they say you shouldn't
be spreading that message that women can
build muscle because it's going to scare
people off and it's like you know what
that's just done because there's
absolutely nonsense
women can build muscle and I think
people need to be educated on that and I
think the difference is how you actually
train is is what is important you have
to be able to understand all the
movements and exactly what you can be
where you can be building muscle is up
to you and actually women with muscle
can cannon is actually quite beautiful
actually
you know that's my preference I like the
determination I like to see a woman has
work ethic as well and and that's what's
actually really appealing to me and I
know that a lot of people share my
opinion but as you say science will tell
you that women can hypertrophy do you
think with with your research that there
is a difference with the rate of
hypertrophy between a male and a female
and what that comes down to so if you
have a look at some of the studies that
come out if you have if you basically
normalize for body size and body shape
and give both men and women this a
similar resistance training program
they'll both hypertrophy similarly to
the same degree basically there may be
some differences in which women can I
purchase me a little bit more in the
upper body compared to men but it's
basically similar now obviously absolute
strength and absolute hypertrophy is
different which can be due to some
innate differences between men and women
including hormone profiles and genetics
and so forth but they do hypertrophy in
a similar way in a similar fashion and
so they both do respond to resistance
training
so we're spoken about the similarities
between men and women what are some of
the differences that you were talking
about are they hormonal differences
mainly yes I mean so you can have a look
at so you could have a look at muscle
fibers for example so we we can all
basically agree that you've got two
major types of muscle fibers the type
one slow-twitch type to fast twitch the
type 1 muscle fibers they love oxidative
metabolism so the slow burn like using
fatty acids as a energy resource and a
type 2 fast twitch muscle fibers
generate a lot of force and their
glycogen ik they like breaking down
glucose but they're short lasting and
they fatigue easing and those type 1
fibers don't fatigue as easily and so
they're usually muscle fibers that are
used for postural fathers
now if you have a look at men and women
and take cross-sectional areas and have
a look at the fiber differences you'll
find that generally speaking women
probably have more type 1 fibers
compared to men however this is very
muscle group specific and so if we look
at muscles like the biceps for example
which is often looked at in these types
of studies women tend to have more type
1 slow fatigue resistant fibers compared
to men and vastus lateralis as well
seems to be a higher propensity for type
1 again
Juana there's always a bias sitting in
here because researchers can only look
at muscles that are easy to look at and
biopsy muscles that are easy to biopsy
so we have to extrapolate that data and
so there's some studies that are saying
that you know overall the fiber
difference isn't that different but
there are other studies that basically
say well you could probably say that
women overall have a propensity for type
1 fibers compared to type 2 so what that
could mean is women potentially would be
better at more endurance type of
training fatigue resistant training and
so there's some studies out there
comparing males to females looking at
resistance training I think it may have
been the bench press looking at a 1 RM
and then looking at how long the
recovery time is before they can do
their 1 RM again and it seems that for
women the time period is far shorter
than that for men and so their recovery
period is far shorter so women seem to
fatigue less and recover earlier and
this may you know this type of
information can be used any way you want
I suppose but you could potentially
extrapolate that out and make an
argument that maybe women could take
higher loads in regards to their
training and could do split training
sessions you know they could take higher
loads but do a morning and evening
session maybe for men lower loads
heavier weight one session longer rest
period so those there is some snippets
of evidence in the literature stating
that this may be the case so the first
thing that comes to my mind when I train
someone that has an endurance background
you know I guess the science could say
that they've developed their type 1
fibers a little bit better
they've developed their type 2 fibers
and so they come to me and they're type
1 dominant and it would take me a longer
time to develop those type ii fibers and
they'll always be showing some type of
characteristics of an endurance style of
athlete you know when we're talking
about percentages of one rep max so if
you get 85 percent of your max someone
who's type one dominant will be able to
perform more reps of 85 percent of their
max than someone who's fast which
dominant but I've always said that it
kind of doesn't really matter to me I'll
train someone based on their goal not on
what I think their fiber type makeup is
so someone comes to me and they've got
an endurance background and they want to
compete in a sport like powerlifting
where they have to perform a 1 rep max I
believe that I can train that person to
be great at 1 rep max see it's a skill
as well as you know long long-term
training developing those the right
muscles is there I mean the studies
always say like this who are they
performing these studies on is it a
matter of when they look at a woman and
say they're more type 1 dominant is that
lifestyle dependent are they getting
women who just don't have a history in
training and then the men that they're
training you know they kind of brought
up a more explosive Sports do you think
that has plays a role in in the study
results like who are they performing
these studies on yeah absolutely uh the
studies are variable and you have some
studies that look at this in athletes
but most of the studies look at
untrained people and they look at
untrained people because they assume
that when they do some sort of
intervention and it may be resistance
training or aerobic training or whatever
it may be that they're gonna have more
noticeable difference and they often do
have more noticeable differences because
obviously there is a ceiling effect in
which people who are well trained are
closer to the ceiling and there's going
to be the percentage difference is going
to be less significant so a lot of these
studies are performed in untrained
individuals I think it's important to
have a look at the fact that if
somebody's untrained then there's going
to be a greater capacity to get better
and so males generally speaking have
probably got some baseline level of
training great
then females for the average population
and so when we look at these particular
studies the significant difference seems
to happen with the untrained women and
not as much with the untrained men
because of potential ceiling difference
yeah like that true now we've spoken
about the muscles now can we talk about
fat distribution between men and women
is there a physiological reason why we
disturb distribute fat in different
areas of our body so when we look at fat
distribution of fat percentages so on
average women tend to have about 10%
more fat being carried around the body
compared to men at any given time and
the distribution is also different and
exactly like what you said it tends to
be the gluteal femoral region so that us
and hips basically is where it's stored
for women and for men it's more around
that midsection what we find is that for
women it's more subcutaneous fat so it's
sitting underneath the skin which is
beneficial in the sense that it's you
can be utilized as an energy substrate
if needed for men it tends to be more
intra-abdominal so deeper fat more
visceral fat around the organs for
example and it's harder to utilize that
fat for energy what we say and this is
really interesting in the literature if
we just talk about general health having
that extra 10% for females and having it
distributed to the gluteal femoral
region is actually cardio metabolically
protective for women but for men it's
not and so what we find is that men the
more weight that they have if men had
that extra 10% around their midsection
or even around the gluteal femoral
region don't be more at risk of cardio
metabolic effects so this is things like
heart attack stroke diabetes things like
that so this fat percentage difference
and distribution is protective for women
now we don't necessarily know why it's
the case we know it's hormone ly driven
in part because we know that as women
age and they become more post menopausal
the estrogen levels begin to drop and
the dropping with estrogen seems to
correlate with that fat actually being
distributed in different areas so now
that fat starts to move to the
midsection and now
that career protective effect disappears
and we know that if women take estrogen
as a hormone replacement therapy that it
can mitigate some of these changes so it
is hormone ly driven in part a really
interesting point is that women tend to
utilize fatty acids as a metabolic
substrate more than men men tend to love
using glucose for energy women tend to
love using fatty acids and so the fact
that women have a higher percentage of
subcutaneous fat that's readily
available is beneficial especially when
we look at the menstrual cycle and we
look at fertility years and have a look
at the different phases of the menstrual
cycle when we look at so basically when
we look at the menstrual cycle we've got
0 to 28 days on average right and we've
got from 0 to 14 day 14 right smack in
the middle on average again is ovulation
the first 14 days is what we call the
follicular phase we're preparing the egg
that eggs getting ready for ovulation is
two major hormones that are at play here
which is luteinizing hormone and
follicle stimulating hormone the
luteinizing hormone is what stimulates
that egg two of you late you get
released into the fallopian tubes and
that spikes right up just before day 14
after day 14 we've got the luteal phase
and this is characterized by spikes in
both estrogen and progesterone and those
two hormones are anabolic so they're
anabolic steroid hormones and the
anabolic in the sense that they promote
growth of the uterine lining they're
preparing it for egg implantation so
it's increasing vascularization it's
increasing nutrient demand it's
increasing the muscle thickness of that
endometrial wall as well so it's
anabolic but it's not just anabolic for
the uterus we know estrogen for example
is anabolic for bones and muscle as well
because we know again in post menopause
that muscle growth diminishes and we
also know that bone density diminishes
another reason why hormone replacement
therapy can be utilized to stop any
osteo paretic effects that can happen in
post menopause so even the menstrual
cycle has these hormonal effects and the
hormonal effects can affect anabolic
catabolic phases seems to be in that
luteal phase where we've got highest
I progesterone the metabolic demand for
the woman increases as well and the
utilization of fatty acids and proteins
goes up and we can see this when we look
in Bloods a couple of study I think a
study came out in nature maybe a year or
two ago that looked at blood plasma
levels of certain nutrients vitamins
minerals nutrients and they saw that in
the luteal phase that fatty acids were
down amino acids were down which
indicated that they'll being utilized
for growth and so it tends to be an
anabolic face in that luteal phase so
the an argument could potentially be
made that a demand a caloric demand or
even a nutrient demand for fatty acids
and proteins go up in the last phase of
the cycle so so should that should we
consider that and think of you know
monitoring a menstrual cycle of a female
and and potentially advising a calorie
surplus during that time it's difficult
because each individual is different we
naturally just want that cook those
extra calories at that time anyway yeah
exactly
unexplained it's a greatly important
point is that the maestra cycle and the
hormone levels there is a tied into play
there with behavior and women are really
really good at knowing exactly what's
happening with their cycle and so they
have these really important cues that
come through and the cues can be I need
more calories coming in the cues could
be I'm a bit tired I don't want to Train
so it's sort of a bit of a protective
effect or I feel like I've got my energy
back let's let's go train and so these
are really important to listen to
because it's your body basically telling
you what's happening and what stage of
the cycle you're in so this is where the
point I made at the beginning was you
know we can look at all the data and we
could take the averages and we could
make inferred decisions from it but you
could also ask your client and just say
how are you feeling you know some
clients may have a lot of menstrual pain
during menstruation and or discomfort
and this may stop them from being able
to engage in exercise and so there may
actually be you know things that are
physically stopping them
from training also the you know never
forget sorry I just dropped my camera
never forget the the the psychological
aspect of all this and so there's
obviously mood changes that occur and
behavioral changes that occur and
sometimes people just don't feel like
training every day actually I wouldn't
recommend it's an interesting thing that
you're talking about it's like the body
knows what it needs when girl craves
it's because she's actually needing it
and in my experience I think it's quite
difficult to be intuitive so us being
the professionals we would get women
that come to ask to be guided by us and
say you know we've got a fat loss
journey this is our goal what's what's
the recommendation and you know let's
just put it simply the recommendation
would be to go on a calorie deficit what
are we doing to the body when it is
going through this anabolic phase the
luteal phase and we are depriving from
nutrients that it's asking for based on
the overall goal is fat loss I know you
feel hungry but your goal is fat loss so
we're gonna maintain this this calorie
restriction are we doing damage by not
listening to the body at this time so
there is something called the the female
athlete triad and the female athlete
triad is basically characterized by
three particular things and these things
can include things like dysmenorrhea or
amenorrhea which is a change in the
period or an absence of the period it
could also be associated with a
reduction in calorie intake but
potentially just not eating enough food
and can also be characterized by bone
mineral loss so these are the three
characteristics of this athletic triad
and when we look at this so you look at
female athletes and you'll find that you
know depending on the type of athlete
there's a 20% increase in them having
amenorrhea so no period compared to the
population being 5% so there there's a
correlation between exercise or
athleticism particularly in the extreme
and
changes to physiology and that can
include the menstrual cycle I think it's
important because when we think about
the luteal phase like bass was saying
that demand that metabolic demand
increases because it's every month the
female body is thinking a baby's coming
I'm going to get an implantation and so
it does whatever it can to prepare for
that and so if there's not enough
nutrients not enough fatty acids not
enough glucose not enough proteins
present in order to sustain that then
the body has to make decisions and so
some of these decisions can include the
fact that well there's not enough
nutrients to focus my energy on if a egg
gets implanted to develop that and so it
puts things into an imbalance and so I
always talk with my students about
homeostasis home is Statesmen only
stasis is what controls everything in
the body it's a happy healthy range for
everything so there's no one particular
number that's beneficial for anything so
there's no one oxygen saturation there's
no one blood glucose level there's no
one anything it's always a ranked to
high disease to low disease let's just
add the body works and so if we look at
there's going to be a range of nutrient
demand that you can sit with it if you
go too low then you're gonna be not
looking after yourself and that can
result in like I said amenorrhea it can
result in changes in hormones and can
result in bone mineral density issues
again is happening long term the good
thing is that for a lot of these women
who do lose their period through
training most just get it back once they
drop the training a little bit and
increase the nutrient intake yeah I
probably went through that I lost my
period for three years there so it can
happen but it's a lot of the time it can
just come back because the body is this
amazing it's this oscillatory circadian
hormone driven pumping out hormones at
specific times and even if it's
suppressed even if it's suppressed due
to the contraceptive pill was suppressed
due to metabolic demand due to exercise
it kicks back in once things get back
into that happy healthy range and is
there um is it detrimental to like
childbearing stages or is it fine
like yes like generally speaking
generally speaking it's fine okay
so I'm good I'll be able to have a baby
at some point okay so okay we're we're
getting with that something that I don't
really speak to the girls so much about
is their periods I kind of keep away
from when we find three weeks of the
month so three out of your way and then
he's got me on the back end of that so
you don't get a break that's right it's
tough being the only guy sometimes but
yeah so like Dinah just said now three
years that was because of overtraining
training I've probably had them regular
now for about four years right so so
would you say she's just back to normal
or do you think there's long term
effects it can happen if a girl um I'd
say this was the time when Diana and I
were training very closely together and
she was really strong really lean she
was doing everything by the books that
was it six days a week training six days
a week training and there were two to
three hour long sessions and she was a
machine and anyway so she's saying she
lost her period at that time yeah is it
like I would get people to come to me
the population of the the clientele that
comes to me our performance orientated
is that something that I should be aware
of like could I be creating long-term
damage on my women it's not just Diana
actually I had a girl that came to me
asking me she wanted to survey me she
was doing a study on performance and
menstrual cycle and she said to me you
know you've got some amazing women that
you're training they're all really
strong do you do change their
programming around their menstrual cycle
and I said to be honest with you my
three strongest women that I train have
all lost their cycle and I kind of felt
a little bit guilty about that it's like
[__] is that it is that a trend like is
this a really bad thing am i safe to say
the diner's back to normal or have we
created long-term damage as far as I can
tell the evidence states that in in most
cases
once homeostasis has been restored in
the sense that and it doesn't take a lot
of the evidence states that it only
takes something like a ten to fifteen
percent decrease in activity and a
specific increase in metabolic int or
nutrient intake in order for things to
be restored again everybody's different
a generalization is exactly that a
generalization taking an average of a
population every individual would need
to be evaluated for themselves but most
of the time once those things are
restored it just kicks straight back in
I mean I had a few other issues I've had
PCOS and endometriosis someone I think
it just took a little bit longer but in
terms of increasing my calories and then
decreasing my training yeah that's
that's all it takes
yeah so there are many there are many
factors like like you were just stating
I mean you know in an individual where
everything else is basically normal and
there's no endometriosis not none of
those types of things then yeah usually
it would just kick back in everyone's
different so I think that that's a
really important point and so there can
be other factors so you may do the right
thing and you may bring those calories
back in you may drop the training and
there may not be a recovery of the
period at least not straight away and
you know this is the type of thing that
women should have a conversation with
the OBGYN about and so they'll be able
to talk about specifics and they'll be
able to talk exactly about what hormones
are happening at what particular time
and nutrient demands and so forth one of
the other questions we wanted to ask was
is there a healthy body fat percentage
between men and women what is that you
know that's a really hard question
so Rangers Rangers you like Rangers yeah
it's all Rangers well Rangers is safe
for me but Rangers is also what's
happening anatomically and
physiologically however it's really
difficult to identify a healthy range
because we're gonna think about what are
the parameters one of the markers that
we're looking at here for healthy so
again if if the goal is performance or
the goal is physique then obviously it's
gonna be very different if the goal is
general cardio metabolic health it's
gonna be different as well
like I said earlier you'll find that
women will have about 10% more body fat
and that is healthy to have that
increase in body fat when it comes to
specific numbers I think throughout the
last time of a man on average their body
fats around about 23 to 30 percent and
for a woman it's around about 30 to 40%
but again it's a range fluctuates I
don't know if you've got experience with
DEXA scans and all of these things but
I've heard that a lot when people say oh
you know up on stage 6 percent body fat
and I've heard actual science saying
hang on a second that's not the fact
because if you were 6 percent or less
you're dead what's what is facts on this
percentage thing yeah so it's it's
difficult because every different
measurement for body fat will give a
little bit of a different reading
because they do it differently so you
got Dex are you've got you know
displacement of water you've got
displacement of air you've got infrared
like you've got all these different ways
of doing it and there's different types
of fat alright so there's the adipose
fat that we you know sit underneath our
ass and our hips and our garden that's
used for energy but there's also brown
fat which we often store around our neck
and shoulder region and that's there for
heat production and so I'm not sure
whether these different methodological
approaches determine the differences
yeah so I would be you know personally
this is personally an again everyone's
goal is different but I'd be less
inclined to focus on the fat percentage
unless it's really high or really low
obviously and focus on what the goal is
and so you can be for lack of a better
term fit in fat it really depends on the
touch so there's people who would be
considered overweight with BMI but
they're healthy I mean I'm sure bass is
obese but again that's an that's a
number representative of you know white
according to stature squared right so
it's a little algorithm that they use
and what BMI is actually really good for
the general population to associate it
with health issues it's actually
a really good marker of that but when
you've got a bodybuilder or a power
lifter coming in there and their BMI
looks obese but in actual fact their
cholesterol is great all their markers
are really good they're healthy they're
fit it's not the best measurement to use
and so my question would be why does why
would one or an individual be focusing
on their fat percentage what is their
goal what is their aim for that and so I
think that should be driving everything
yeah interestingly I think it's just one
of those like useless pieces of trivia
that people just like to know the number
I'm asked that a lot of times so just
like let's just get I don't know if
there is a science behind this but would
you have any idea about you see mr.
Olympia guys like Ronnie Coleman or Phil
Heath or whatever would you like just
based on the numbers that you just
spread out like a healthy range for a
male did you say that was around 30% to
me that sounds like a really fat guy
yeah 30% is I should have been more
specific
as you age both males and females
increase their body fat percentage and
so by the time you're in your 70s the
average is around about 30% but when
you're younger and you're in your early
20s it's it's 23 percentage either way
that's still a lot higher than my
perception of what a good body fat
percentage should be so it's like a
common number that guys are going for is
like 10% like to say I'm a sub 10% means
you're shredded is sub 10% just that is
that just an incorrect number well I
mean again it's for me like exactly like
you said it my eyes it's arbitrary and
what is it right is it is it just
something they can hold on to and wave
it like a flag I think so you know this
is me and I think a lot of people like
to do that they'd like to have proxies
that represent who they are or what they
are and numbers tend to be big on that I
mean I had a DEXA scan at work because
the the athletics department was doing
it I said yeah do a DEXA scan and the
guy that was the rep that was running I
think I was 11% and he goes he goes oh
congratulations congratulations that's
great and I say great for what it's just
really
good I said really good for what it's
embedded in our minds that there's a
number and the numbers our goal and we
have to hit that goal no matter what but
I mean are you happy in yourself are you
fit are you healthy are you doing all
the things that you want to be able to
do are you hitting your goals which may
be certain lifts or certain looks you
know if you're hitting those what does
the number truly mean when you if you're
a physique competitor you're up on stage
they ask you for your numbers I don't on
this topic of body fat something that
I've heard I don't know if it's like it
was just like one of those useless
pieces of trivia trivia conversations
where it could be a complete load of
crap but I'd like to know if you know
anything about this
a man is it's innate that a male is
attracted to a fatter backside of a
female because it tells that male that
she's healthy enough she's got a body
fat percentage that is high enough to be
in the healthy range to bear a child is
there any merit to this or is it just
like a funny joke so funny enough
there's heaps of research on this and
and and some of its a bit dubious and
spurious and some of it a lot of it's
based on evolutionary psychology it
makes it does make sense if you you know
if you look at it superficially it makes
sense but what humans are really good at
is drawing lines between two things that
aren't correlated and just correlating
them now from from what I can tell from
what's been published and I'm not an
evolutionary psychologist at all but
these tend to be the three main answers
to your question so what the research
talks about is waist-to-hip ratio and so
they have a look at the number of
individuals they they poll a number of
males and they ask them to evaluate
images of women who have different
waist-to-hip ratio and the lower the
waist-hip ratio means basically the the
title of the hip the wider the tired
the wife's the water the hip which is
the point that you're getting at before
now it tends to be that among multiple
populations that the lower the waist hip
ratio the more attractive it's perceived
by the participant by the male
participant all right and then the
question is why and so an argument could
be made that it is an indirect or direct
reference to fertility and so maybe it's
an indication that a woman who has a
lower waist separation is more fertile
not a lot of evidence to suggest that is
the case but that could be a particular
theory another theory is that maybe it's
just population specific maybe in all
these studies they're polling 17 year
old college boys and that's what 17 year
olds college boys and maybe if you go to
a different age or maybe if you go to a
different cultural population maybe
another part of the planet it's not
necessarily the case and then the third
factor which I'm inclined does play a
role to some degree is that our opinion
of attractiveness there's a degree
that's innate but also a degree that is
culturally influenced and I will be
surprised that over the past 60 to 100
years that the media has demonstrated
that hey this is what's attractive a low
hip to waist ratio and therefore it gets
embedded in the psyche and then when you
ask a person that court they're
basically primed to answer that question
and so their answers going to be
I find the low waist-to-hip ratio the
most attractive so I it is actually a
lot more complex than it first looks I
think it's probably a combination of all
of it I don't think you could dispel one
or another I think it's a combination of
all together so can we just go back to
the the pregnancy talk and go back to
postpartum well I'm the only one in this
room that's had a kid when we had our
daughter I was able to get back into the
best shape of my life now is this
something that is common that you see or
sciences with women is there something
that happens hormonal each hour
that enables us to get back in better
shape I don't know I was able to achieve
good point body composition goals and I
just want to know if that's something
that happened to me hormonal II so that
could potentially be used specifically
my wife for example
she's got a daughter she looks great I
know and she had a c-section too so
those ads are after having a c-section
so you know but again I think what's
really a really important factor here I
could be wrong but what's an important
fact here is Fitness prior to pregnancy
and so if an individual is quite fit
prior to pregnancy there's going to be
probably a better recovery period and a
better rebound period sure a rebound
period basically now my wife had a
c-section and so she was bedridden for a
couple of days but you know apart from
that you know you've got the separation
of the ABS that is common and that
occurs you're going to be very careful
with that
abdominal separation and with a
c-section you're obviously cutting
through multiple tissue layers you know
skin muscle fat fashion and so forth and
so recovery is needed there but I think
a lot of the time once the baby's born
hormones are going to be produced which
are going to now be protective for
nutrients for that baby so it's going to
be things that octave oxytocin and
progesterone oxytocin and prolactin are
the two hormones that are gonna start
shooting through the roof and oxytocin
we always think about as the love
molecule I think if you've probably
heard a bit like that
I always tell my students oxytocin is
the love-hate molecule because they did
some studies and they showed that tribal
individuals who were just about to go to
war they had a look at their blood serum
and the oxytocin was through the roof
and so oxytocin is there to solidify
relationships whether it's good or bad
and the interesting thing for oxytocin
with pregnancies oxytocin is there to
solidify relationships but it's also
there for milk letdown so oxytocin
contracts muscles and so it contracts
the muscles of the breast tissue to push
that milk out but it's also the hormone
that gets released during labor to
contract the uterus to push the Bob out
as well
so oxytocin is really important hello
Jason release for post pregnant post
postpartum yeah you'll have varying
degrees of oxytocin being released
throughout your whole life basically
yeah and then with breastfeeding so I
breastfed for nineteen months and I
guess it was probably off that's great
yeah really long time it was probably
towards that end maybe a year and a half
where I really got heavy into my
training and really focused on it but
yeah I got really lean at that time I
think you're in your best shape probably
about two years after yeah yeah okay so
how long do our home like how long till
we come back to that
like balanced level of hormones after
childbirth so you're you breastfeeding
for nine months did you say nine ten
months
okay so historically we breastfed for up
to three years postpartum sometimes for
years because milk was the primary
energy source for infants and so hormone
levels are gonna be again favored for
feeding the bub and then a lot of
nutrients coming in they're gonna be
favored for that as well because bubs
getting things like not just nutrients
but it's getting your antibodies it's
getting protective factors and chemicals
in your breast milk as well which is
obviously going to help Bob and so a lot
of energy goes into that and so a lot of
women there's a high metabolic demand
throughout that time often once the
breastfeeding stops things relatively
quickly hormonal e wise will go back to
a normal rhythm and this is one of the
reasons why women after having a baby
can have another baby relatively quickly
soon after what is a healthy deficit if
you're trying to achieve fat loss when
you're breastfeeding I waited till after
I mean my milk were you in billing
channel by that point anyway so I was
near my name aim was never to be in a
calorie deficit I was just fueling my
body we definitely get loads of women
who come and train with us postpartum
who are wanting to achieve fat loss but
are still breastfeeding so what is a
safe rate for them to be yeah
and I don't know if it I don't know if
there's an answer to it because
obviously weight loss is is about is a
sum of you know calorie and calorie out
yeah you know what you take in what you
burn in and there's multiple factors
coming into play here which were never
there prior to bub which is I don't know
how much energy you burn just by
producing breast milk yeah and also how
much sleep are you getting you know a
lot of people if they don't get enough
sleep they tend to gain weight as well
so sleep is really important to maintain
a whole bunch of other homeostatic
functions so I think there's too many
factors to be able to make a statement
on it I think an individual would need
to weigh it out but it's it's you know
it would be really important for them to
have the conversation with their GP or
ob/gyn and nutritionist or dietitian
about it because it's it's probably not
something that an individual should just
do on a whim or on their own steam
because so many factors coming into play
yeah all right I think we are at an hour
so we're going to wrap it up we've
absolutely loved this chat today I
definitely learn a whole bunch yeah
thank you so much doc thanks other me
thank you for sharing your perspective
I'm sure our audience has learned a lot
as well so yeah we're gonna try and get
you back on soon thank you can I can I
finish by saying that for those who are
listening if you find that the things
that I've said all you guys have said
doesn't match you it's because the type
of information that I've gathered at
least is for that population and it's
been it's generalistic yeah and so you
do need to listen to your own body and I
think coaches should listen to their
clients as well in regards to how their
bodies are and that information from the
literature is important and it is
scientific data and it's useful but it
should be taken to inform your practice
and inform best practice and so don't
ignore your client and say well this is
what the literature says so I'm gonna
ignore exactly how you feel about your
body shouldn't be done whatsoever so for
our audience I'm sure they've loved
listening to you
and where is the best place for them to
find you so you can find me on instagram
at dr. mike Todorovic drm i ke tod oro
v.i.c
I need to find myself to shorter surname
podcast which is dr. Matt and dr. Mike's
medical podcast you can find it on our
Kaveri thank you it's on every base
basically every podcasting platform yeah
and you can hear us on ABC radio every
Tuesday night at 8 p.m. and well YouTube
I'm on YouTube as well so dr. Matt and
dr. Mike on youtube if you want to learn
about how the human body works
[Music]